WIP: Document how Packit team kanbanz (#531)
packit/agile: docs/kanban.md

# How Packit team does Kanban?

> Packit team follows a Kanban methodology but not use just a board with `todo`/`wip`/`done` columns. We have couple of extra columns and rules. Let's take a look:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packit team follows the Kanban methodology but does not use just a board with `todo`/`wip`/`done` columns. We have a couple of extra columns and rules. Let's take a look:
```

## Packit Kanban Board

The current board is publicly available at https://github.com/orgs/packit/projects/7.

### Card states (board columns)

#### `new`

> This is a column where all the new cards are added (automatically for public repositories, via GitHub action for private ones). At the beginning of each [Standup meeting](./meetings#Standup), a [triaging](#Triage) of new unassigned cards happens resulting in either moving the card away into one of the other states or assigning a team member to further investigate and finish the triaging. Also, a card can be returned to the `new` column if we realise the card is not clear or needs attention (e.g. to check for relevancy). This can happen when going through the old cards during [Standup](./meetings#Standup).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a column where all the new cards are added (automatically for public repositories, via GitHub action for private ones). At the beginning of each [Standup meeting](./meetings#Standup), a [triaging](#Triage) of new unassigned cards happens resulting in either moving the card away into one of the other states or assigning a team member to further investigate and finish the triaging. Also, a card can be returned to the `new` column if we realise the card is not clear or needs attention (e.g. to verify its relevance). This can happen when going through the old cards during [Standup](./meetings#Standup).
```

#### `backlog`

This is a pile of cards that have been basically categorized but are not a current priority (present in the `priority-backlog`), or it is not within our capacity to finish them within next 3 months. The order of this column is not maintained.

#### `priority-backlog`

> This is an ordered list of categorized cards that the team is considering for the next work. The priority is based on impact, user value, urgency and the current team plans and capacity. The team is revisiting the epic-level priorities on a quarterly level and the cards in the `priority-backlog` should be done in 3 months. This means the number of cards needs to be maintained below ~50.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an ordered list of categorized cards that the team is considering for the upcoming work. Their priority is determined based on impact, user value, urgency and current team plans and capacity. The team is revisiting the epic-level priorities on a quarterly level and the cards in the `priority-backlog` should be finished in 3 months. This means the number of cards needs to be maintained to be below ~50.
```

> This is an ordered list of categorized cards that the team is considering for the next work. The priority is based on impact, user value, urgency and the current team plans and capacity. The team is revisiting the epic-level priorities on a quarterly level and the cards in the `priority-backlog` should be done in 3 months. This means the number of cards needs to be maintained below ~50.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an ordered list of categorized cards that the team is considering for the next work. The priority is based on impact, user value, urgency and the current team plans and capacity. The team revisits the epic-level priorities quarterly and the cards in the `priority-backlog` should be done in 3 months. This means the number of cards needs to be maintained below ~50.
```

#### `refined`

> This column consists of cards prepared to be worked on next when someone has a free capacity. The tasks should be actionable right away and doable by anyone. To get a card to this state a [refining process](#Refine) is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This column consists of cards prepared to be worked on next when someone has capacity. The tasks should be actionable right away and doable by anyone. To get a card to this state a [refining process](#Refine) is used.
```

#### Area

These labels help to group related cards across all the projects. The area can determine a target git-forge (e.g. `area/github`/`area/gitlab`), service being integrated (e.g. `area/testing-farm` or `area/copr`) or a shared code-level logic (e.g. `area/config` or `area/database`).

#### Complexity

This is a rough estimation of how much time is expected for this card to be done. Mainly to separate epics from single cards. -- work consisting of multiple tasks, usually taking more time and being discussed in quarterly meetings.

#### Gain

This determines the value it gives to affected users.

- `gain/high`: significant change for the user, e.g.:
  - New users can start using Packit.
  - Significant time is saved for the user when the task is done.
  - A user might stop using Packit when not available.
- `gain/low`: change not so important to start/stop using Packit, e.g.:
  - If `workaround-exists` (separate label).
  - User can fully benefit from Packit without the card being done.

#### Impact

> These labels determine the size of a user group affected by this card combined with a frequency. To make this comparable, it is based on generic user roles like `upstream-developer` or `fedora-maintainer`. This means we won't mark a card as high-impactful when all (but a few in reality) users of a rear functionality are affected.

Reviewer 2: I assume this is supposed to be rare? Rear functionality had me very confused for a while :sweat_smile: 

```suggestion
These labels determine the size of a user group affected by this card combined with a frequency. To make this comparable, it is based on generic user roles like `upstream-developer` or `fedora-maintainer`. This means we won't mark a card as high-impactful when all (but a few in reality) users of a rare functionality are affected.
```

#### `blocked`

This label is used to show that we can't move this card/work forward because of an external reason. For a reason, this is not a board state since the card can be blocked on various states of the development.

#### `resource-reduction`

This label marks tasks that can lead to better resource utilisation. (Without significant functional loss, fewer resources can be spent.)

#### `discuss`

This label helps us gather cards to be discussed in weekly architecture meetings.

### Story points

Despite using Kanban, we use the Fibonnacci sequence numbers as story points similarly to Scrum to estimate the card's complexity, uncertanity and effort. As described in the [section about Refinement meeting](meetings#refinement), the main purpose of the sizing in our team is to brought up discussion and find differences in task understanding. As with regular Kanban where all the cards are made similar in time, we split all cards that can take more than a few days by not allowing cards with more than 5 story points.

#### Story point scale

This is how we think about the scale:

> - `1`: Very simple card done in a few hours. Everything is clear and straightforward. No unknown at all.

Author: +1 makes more sense..;)

> - `1`: Very simple card done in a few hours. Everything is clear and straightforward. No unknown at all.

Author: Would this work?

1: ~20 minutes
2: hours
3: day or two
5: week

##### To remove:

- `needs-info` (`new` state)
- `needs-design` (not used)
- `pinned`
- `triaged`
- `invalid`
- `RHOSC`, `GSOC`
- Is `has-release-notes` still relevant?
- Do `wontfix` and `invalid` labels provide any value when the issue is closed and marked as not planned with a comment?

##### Edits

- Rename `area/refactor` to `area/technical-debt`.
- Rename `testing` to `area/testing`

##### Questions

- Do we need complexity?
- Do we need `kind/documentation`? (We have a separate project for doc-only cards and don't mention this explicitly on other cards.)

### Grooming process cheat sheet:

### Triage

:::note

Process of handling new cards and categorizing them.

:::

1. Triaging
   1. **_Is the card not valid or out of our scope?_** => Politely provide reasoning and close the issue as not planned.
   2. **_Do we have a related card for this?_** => Link the relevant cards, and add to an epic if applicable. Link and close in favour of a duplicate issue if applicable.
   3. **_Do we need to get more information from the requester? Is it necessary for a team-member to take a look?_** => Assign a person to continue with the discussion and leave it in the `new` column.

>    4. **_Is the task actionable and we are in general sure what the card is about and which way the solution be chosen?_** => Enhance the title and description, if needed, and move outside of the `new` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4. **_Is the task actionable and do we have a clear understanding of the card's purpose and the solution direction??_** => Enhance the title and description, if needed, and move outside of the `new` column.
```
